= yara-normalize

Normalizes YARA signatures into a repeatable, stable hash even when
non-semantic changes are made (whitespace, comments, tag ordering, variable
renaming, etc.).

To enable consistent comparisons between YARA rules, a uniform fingerprinting
standard is applied:

1. *Strings section* — each string value (the part after the '=') is extracted,
   sorted alphabetically, and the sorted list is hashed with SHA-256.  Variable
   names ($a, $mshtmlExec_1, …) are excluded from the hash so that renaming
   does not change the fingerprint.

2. *Condition section* — variable references ($name, #name) are replaced with
   positional tokens ($0, $1, …) in order of first appearance, so cosmetic
   renames do not affect the hash.  The resulting text is hashed with SHA-256.

The rule fingerprint is:

  yn<VERSION>:<last-16-hex-chars-of-strings-SHA256>:<last-10-hex-chars-of-condition-SHA256>

Prior to version 0.4.0 the fingerprint used MD5 and carried the prefix +yn01+.
Since 0.4.0 the fingerprint uses SHA-256 and carries the prefix +yn02+.  The
two identifier series are not interchangeable.

== Usage

  require 'yara-normalize'

  sig = <<~EOS
    rule DataConversion__wide : IntegerParsing DataConversion {
      meta:
        weight = 1
      strings:
        $ = "wtoi" nocase
        $ = "wtol" nocase
        $ = "wtof" nocase
        $ = "wtodb" nocase
      condition:
        any of them
    }
  EOS

  yn = YaraTools::YaraRule.new(sig)

  puts yn.hash
  # => yn02:6783b7082bed88dc:6821e3f6a3

  puts yn.name    # => DataConversion__wide
  pp   yn.tags    # => ["IntegerParsing", "DataConversion"]
  pp   yn.meta    # => {"weight"=>"1"}
  pp   yn.strings # => ["$ = \"wtoi\" nocase", ...]

  puts yn.normalize
  # => rule DataConversion__wide : IntegerParsing DataConversion {
  #      meta:
  #        weight = 1
  #      strings:
  #        $ = "wtoi" nocase
  #        $ = "wtol" nocase
  #        $ = "wtof" nocase
  #        $ = "wtodb" nocase
  #      condition:
  #        any of them
  #    }

Splitting a multi-rule file:

  rules = YaraTools::Splitter.split(File.read("ruleset.yar"))
  rules.each { |r| puts "#{r.name}: #{r.hash}" }

== Security notes

* Fingerprints use SHA-256 (as of yn02).  MD5-based yn01 hashes should be
  considered legacy and re-computed.
* +YaraRule#hash+ overrides Ruby's +Object#hash+.  Do *not* use +YaraRule+
  objects as Hash keys; the method returns a String fingerprint, not the
  Integer that Ruby's Hash tables require.

== Contributing to yara-normalize

* Check out the latest master to make sure the feature hasn't been implemented
  or the bug hasn't been fixed yet.
* Check out the issue tracker to make sure someone already hasn't requested it
  and/or contributed it.
* Fork the project.
* Start a feature/bugfix branch.
* Commit and push until you are happy with your contribution.
* Make sure to add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Please try not to mess with the Rakefile, version, or history.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2012 chrislee35. See LICENSE.txt for further details.
